---
layout: post
title:  "Service Objects"
date:   2019-02-14
categories: Ruby Rails Service Objects
---

_A service object is a simple ruby object with one public method that will execute business logic._

Often you will find this logic located in the models or controllers. Both of these places have downsides.

Business logic in the models often take the form of callbacks like `before_create`, `after_update`, `after_destroy`, ...
Callbacks make your code harder to test because you can not do any of these actions without the additional logic.
It also makes it harder to maintain, person A might have added the callback but person B is clueless about it.
So when person B, who can be you in the future, starts calling for example `.create` he might have created some additional records
or send emails without intending to.

Business logic in the controllers are more in the right place, but your controllers can become rather big. Are you going to test
the business logic by doing requests all the time? What if you need the exact same logic in another place? All this logic in your controller
will also make them fat.

So in the models it is more dangerous and make testing in general harder, depending on the amount of callbacks and what is inside of them,
and in the controllers it can cause duplication of the same logic.

When we put this logic in a service object
- we can use it everywhere in our application,
- we can test the specific logic with it,
- we keep our models simple,
- we keep our controllers small.

## Giving them a home
Your apps folder looks something like this:
```
.
├── app
│   ├── channels
│   └── controllers
│   └── jobs
│   └── mailers
│   └── models
│   └── views
```
But none of these seem like a good fit...
We also have the `lib/` folder, but this also does not feel right.
Everything in the lib folder should be code that can be used in a different project.
So we have to create our own folder like `app/services/`
Some people seem to forget that it is perfectly fine to add folders to your project!

## Examples
```ruby
class Article::updateService
  def initialize(article, params: params)
    @article = article
	@params = params
  end

  def execute
    Article.transaction do
      article.update_atrributes(params)
      create_activity_for(article)
    end

    article 
  end

  private

  attr_reader :params

  def create_activiy_for(article)
    # create activity logic
  end
end
```

### How it looks in the controller
```ruby
def update
  article = Article::UpdateService.new(Article.find(params[:id]), params: article_params).execute
  if article.errors.empty?
    render json: article, status: :ok
  else
    render json: article.errors, status: :unprocessible_entity
  end
end
```
```ruby
def create
  article = Article::CreateService.new(params).execute
  if article.persisted?
    render json: article, status: :created
  else
    render json: article.errors, status: :unprocessible_entity
  end
end
```
```ruby
def destroy
  article = Article::DestroyService.new(article).execute
  if article.destroyed?
    head :no_content
  else
    render json: article.errors, status: :unprocessible_entity
  end
end
```

## Use a base class
It is always a good idea to use a base class when using patterns like services.
A nice trick I like is adding a class method `execute`
```ruby
class ApplicationService
  def self.execute(*args, &block)
    self.new(*args, &block).execute
  end
end
```

So now we let every service class inherit from it just like ApplicationController
```ruby
class Article::CreateService < ApplicationService
  ...
end
```

And now we can do:
```ruby
article = Article::CreateService.execute(params)
```

## Make them more flexible
Sometimes moving code into isolation can make things harder.
For example let's say we use `cancancan` and before we save we want to `authorize!` the specific article we setup
in our service?
You could pass the ability into the service, but you don't always have or need an ability.
A way to fix this and make our services more flexible is by using `yield`

```ruby
def execute
  article = Article.new
  article.name = 'new article'
  yield if block_given?
  article.save!
  article
end
```

so we can now do in our controller:
```ruby
article = Article::CreateService.execute(params) do |article|
  authorize! :create, article
end
```
So if the current user in our controller action is not authorized to create the article, we will not create it!.


